Beneath your liver and behind your stomach,
you have a fish-shaped gland called your pancreas.
The head of the pancreas, on the right side,
is connected to the small intestine,
where most digestion takes place.
The pancreas secretes chemicals
that help you digest food.
It also produces the hormone insulin
shown here as green particles
when blood levels of glucose increase.
Glucose, shown as white particles,
is a type of sugar that comes from
carbohydrate-containing foods.
Normally, insulin “unlocks” cells
allowing glucose to move out of your bloodstream
into your cells for energy.
Insulin is produced until
blood glucose levels fall below a certain level.
The insulin attaches to cells
on the walls of blood vessels, liver, muscles and fat.
In response, the cells absorb glucose out of the blood.
In type 1 diabetes,
the pancreas produces little or no insulin.
In type 2 diabetes,
the pancreas does not produce enough insulin
or the cells it attaches to do not respond.
If glucose is not absorbed,
blood levels stay high,
which can lead to serious health problems.
Too much glucose damages the walls of blood vessels.
This damage increases the risk of
developing complications of diabetes,
including eye disease, called retinopathy;
heart disease; kidney disease, called nephropathy;
and nerve disease, called neuropathy.
Treatment options are available.
See your doctor for further information.